--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025      
94 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research  article      Geotechnical Engineering and Engineering Geology  
 
Experience of using low - and medium -frequency ground penetrating radars  
to study the internal structure of a glacier and the bedrock topography  
in the Schirmacher Oasis area , East Antarctica  
 
Marina P. Kashkevich1, Alina S. Boronina1, Evgenii M. Mikhailov2, Serge y V. Popov1,3 
1 Saint Petersburg State University , Saint  Petersburg , Russia  
2 All-Russian Geological Research Institute of A.P.Karpinsky , Saint  Petersburg , Russia  
3 VNIIOkeangeologia , Saint  Petersburg , Russia  
 
 
How to cite this article : Kashkevich M.P., Boronina A.S., Mikhailov E.M., Popov S.V.  Experience of using 
low- and medium -frequency ground penetrating radars to study the internal structure of a glacier and the 
bedrock topography in the Schirmacher Oasis area, East Antarctica . Journal of Mining Institute . 2025. Vol. 273. 
N 16597 , p. 94-107. 
 
Abstract  
During the expeditionary research of 2023 -2024 in the conditions of thick Antarctic ice sheet, the medium - and 
low-frequency ground penetrating radars (GPR) OKO -3 with a  150 MHz antenna and Triton -M with an extendable  
25-50-100 MHz antenna (LOGIS LLC, Russia) improved and adapted for glacier investigations were tested for 
the first time. An example of the ice sheet study in the Schirmacher Oasis area showed that the OKO -3 GPR 
allows obtaining detailed information on the internal structure of the ice sheet to depths of about 200 m and 
successfully solving glacial stratigraphy issues. The Triton -M GPR has proven itself well for mapping the roof 
of underlying rocks to depths of 250 -300 m. The article presents new data on the glacier structure in the Novo 
Runway area, as well as information on the glacier thickness and the subglacial rock base topography near the 
Schirmacher Oasis (Novolazarevskaya and Maitri stations). Typical  structures of the glacier strata in this area 
are gently sloping layers and steep folds that replace them, complicated by crevasses. The subglacial topography 
to the south of the oasis is quite gentle. Individual uplifts and depressions do not exceed 30 m . The interface 
between the ice and the rock base was recorded over a distance of 4.5 km to the south of the oasis. In the east, 
about a kilometre from the last rock outcrop, the oasis is limited by a sharp depression in the bed. New data opens 
up the poss ibility of constructing the ice sheet models, studying its dynamics and evolution, and finding patterns 
in the crevasse formation.  
 
Keywords  
ground penetrating radar; Schirmacher Oasis; glacier structure; glacial stratigraphy; bedrock topography; OKO -3 
ground penetrating radar; Triton -M ground penetrating radar  
 
Received : 15.10.2024                Accepted : 10.04.2025                Online : 02.06.2025                Published : 07.07.2025 
 
Introduction  
Russian (former Soviet) radio -echo sounding (RES) research in Antarctica began in February 
1964, when employees of the Arctic and Antarctic Research Institute (AARI) conducted the first 
experiments to study the electromagnetic waves propagation in a glacier body [1]. Since then, this 
method has been successfully used on the sixth continent to study the glacier structure, the subglacial 
topography, and to determine the state of the subglacial medium, inc luding the presence of water 
bodies [1-3]. 
Later on, portable subsurface  sounding radars ( ground penetrating radar, GPR) were developed , 
which have a smaller penetration depth, but significantly greater detail. High resolution and mo-
bility  of GPR enabled to solve many urgent issues of ensuring the safety of logistics operations in 
Antarctica. The GPR make it possible to study the structure of a
--- PAGE 2 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025   
95 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
 
hydrography features of oases for the prompt assessment of the state of transport hubs and commu-
nication routes [4-6]. 
In addition to deep radar studies of features under kilometre -thick ice layers and, on the 
contrary, very detailed GPR near -surface surveys using high -frequency antennas, specia l atten-
tion should be paid to glacier studies in the medium depth range (first hundreds of metres) using 
medium - and low -frequency antennas from 25 to 150 MHz. The data obtained make it possible 
to study the internal structure of glacier strata and to cons truct their 3D models. It becomes pos-
sible to map folded structures in the glacier and faults in them by tracing marker horizons, to 
correlated fold elements and crevasse areas, to identify and outline individual ice flows and zones 
of their junction. Thes e data provide a background for modelling the processes occurring in glaciers . 
Such GPR, in addition to the internal structure of the glacier, allow for mapping the subglacial 
topography, which is of key importance in the formation of layers in glacier str ata. The ice flow 
direction, the crevasse occurrence probability, and the englacial channel development depend  
on it. An idea of the ice sheet thickness is important as it is and is primary information required 
for mathematical modelling of glacier dynami cs and heat and mass transfer in it [7-9]. In addition, 
mapping the subglacial topography is also an urgent task to ensure the safety of t ransport operations 
and the placement of infrastructure. In areas with smooth near -horizontal limits of underlying  rocks, 
unbroken ice layers are highly likely. They seem to be the most stable and safe areas. On the 
contrary, pronounced topography, elevati on differences, large inclination angles of the rock base 
walls are prerequisites for deformations and various fault types in the glacier body, hindering its 
use for organizing communication routes, constructing facilities, etc. However, mapping the sub-
glacial topography with the required degree of detail is not simple. High ice resistance [10] and 
significant depths exclude the use of electrical resistivity tomogra phy. Complex conditions for 
the excitation of elastic vibrations limit the use of shallow seismic exploration. Magnetotelluric 
prospecting, transient electromagnetic method, and other electromagnetic techniques with un-
grounded lines based on the diffusion equation do not provide the required detail. The most  
suitable method for solving the issue at hand is GPR with low -frequency antennas and equipment 
with a long record length.  
In this article, the authors share their experience in using two GPR developed by LOGIS LLC 
(Russia) on the Antarctic ice sheet: OKO -3 with a shielded AB -150 antenna (central frequency  
150 MHz) and Triton -M with telescopic unshielded 25 -50-100 MHz antennas.  
A brief overview of radar research in Antarctica  
Ice-penetrating radars have  been used to study glaciers since the middle of the last century. 
The first Russian (former Soviet  Union ) studies on the application of this method were conducted  
at Mirny Station in February 1964 by employees of the Ice and Ocean Physics Department of t he 
AARI. Two years later, the first experiments were conducted with a radar installed on board  
an Il -14 aircraft. In February 1968, the first our areal airborne radar survey was carried out  
on Enderby Land. In 1967, AARI developed the first Russian (form er Soviet)  ice-penetrating 
radar for studying thick polar glaciers, the RLS -60-67 [1]. Similar foreign studies were conducted 
by the Scott Polar Research Institute (SPRI) employees in December 1963 on the Brunt Ice  
Shelf [11]. 
Since the 1970s, RES research has become the main method for s
--- PAGE 3 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025      
96 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
  
attenuation in the glacier (which depends on the frequency) and the size of the antennas, which 
are critical for mounting on an aircraft. In Russian practice, RES research with a sounding pulse 
frequency of 60 MHz have been used for a long time. Recently, a device wit h a frequency of  
130 MHz has been used. A comprehensive review of these types of research is given in [1, 3] and 
other papers.  
Ice-penetrating radars, with their high power (to 80 kW) and a fairly broad pulse (to 1 μs), allow 
successful locating of multi -kilometre glaciers. However, for the same reasons, they cannot provide  
detailed studies of the near -surface part, while it is of significant interest both for glaciology and for 
solving engineering issues, in particular, ensuring the transport operations safety by identifying cre-
vasses in the glacier body. For this purpose, GPR are used, which have a much lower power and the 
sounding pulse duration. After the discovery of Lake Vostok [13, 14], the radar method is actively 
used to identify and study subglacial water bodies [15-18]. 
High -frequency GPR (400 -900 MHz) proved themselves well for studying the up per part of 
a glacier to a depth of 20 m. The first examples of their successful application were given in the 
works of foreign authors and relate to studies of both Antarctic and mountain glaciers [2, 19, 20]. 
Since 2013, GPR have been regularly used by the Russian Antarctic Expedition (RAE) experts to 
ensure the transport operations safety, construction of infrastructure facilities, and other  
engineering tasks. GPR studies are part of glacier engineering su rveys, where they occupy a  
leading place among other techniques. GPR with antennas of the specified frequencies provide 
for detecting crevasses and determining their morphology, assessing the thickness of ice above 
water bodies, marking and outlining dang erous zones on glaciers and snow -firn strata. As an 
example, we can cite the work on selecting a site for the construction of an airfield at Mirny 
Station, identifying crevasses in sectio ns of the route of the Progress – Vostok logistic traverse, 
and studying a lake that formed at the site of a large depression in the Dålk Glacier in the Progress 
Station area  [21, 22]. 
Near the Progress Station, GPR studies have been conducted for several years. They enabled 
to organize a safe route between the station and the airfield [1], select sites for a fuel storage 
depot, and survey a section of the glacier for crevasses where scientific expedition vessels are 
unloaded [23]. High -frequency GPR also helps to build airbases in Antarctica, including both 
searching for suitable sites for subsequent construction and surveying existing runways [24, 25]. 
Examples include monitoring the international Novo Runway [26], construction of the  
new Zenit runway near the Progress Station, searching for safe sites on the glacier for  
building airfields near the Russkaya and Mirny stations, as well as the Bunger Hills field  
camp. In addition, GPR provides important assistance in the study of permafrost, including in 
Antarctica [27-29]. 
In comparison with powerful ice -penetrating radars providing depths of hundreds and even a few 
thousand metres, as well a s high -frequency antennas used for detailed study of the upper section, 
undeservedly little attention is paid to low - and medium -frequency radars with a central frequency 
range of 25 -150 MHz. They make it possible to study in detail the glacial strata stru cture to depths of 
about 200 m, to obtain data on the morphology of lake basins with a water column thickness of several 
tens of metres, to map the subglacial rock base at depths of 250 -300 m [30, 31]. These data provide 
a background for modelling gl
--- PAGE 4 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025   
97 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
 
Since 2017, RAE researchers have been carrying out work on the Boulder – Ledyanoe – Dålk 
lake system, as well as on the sinkhole formed on Lake Dålk site (Progress -1 field base area, Larse-
mann Hills). The work involved GPR with a set of antennas of differe nt frequencies: 900, 500, 200, 
150, and 75 MHz. To obtain bottom reflections in the deepest depressions of these lakes, an antenna 
with a frequency of 75 MHz was used. Thus, reflections were recorded on Lake Boulder at a water 
thickness of more than 40 m [22]. New data on Lake Progress structure, in particular its subglacial 
part, were obtained using 500 and 38 MHz antennas [33]. 
The paper  [29] presents the results of work with the GSSI SIR -20 GPR at a sounding pulse frequency 
of 100 MHz at the boundary of the ice cap with the Larsemann Hills oasis, aimed at mapping the roof of 
the bedrock beneath the glacier. The maximum possible sounding depth was 89 m, the maximum depth 
of the identifiable glacier strata was 75 m. The authors [29] noted the possibility of identifying areas of 
meltwater accumulation in depressions in the rock topography when analysing the wave field.  
The VIRL -7 GPR (20 MHz) is successfully used to study mountain glaciers in the Pamirs, Cau-
casus, and Polar Ura ls. In [34], based on VIRL -7 GPR surveys, the change of the Abramov Glacier 
volume in the Pamirs was evaluated over the past 32 years. The maximum ice thickness was 219 m. 
Similar work assessed the ice thickness change on Elbrus for the period from 1997 to 2017 using the 
VIRL -6 GPR (20 MHz) mounted on a helicopter [35]. The maximum ice thickness obtained by the 
authors on the Bolshoy Azau Glacier was 237±12.6 m.  
GPR with antennas of different frequencies are actively and successfully used in the Svalbard 
glaciers study. In particular, the Pulse Ekko GPR with a 50 MHz antenna enables to obtain reflections 
from inte rfaces in the glacier at depths greater than 250 m. The authors of [36-38] show positive 
experience in mapping the underlying rock base, studying the distribution of warm ice fragments in 
the glacier body, and identifying englacial channels. The GPR method makes a significant contribu-
tion to the study of glaciers and soil in Greenland [39, 40], as well as Iceland and the islands of the 
Canadian Archipelago [41, 42]. 
Work area and research targets  
The work area is in the vicinity of the Schirmacher Oasis (East Antarctica), including its eastern 
end, as well as the area to the south, where on the ice cap, approximately 7 km from the oasis, there is 
a Novo Runway (Fig. 1). The study targets were the subglacial rock base in the continuation of the 
Schirmacher Oasis and the ice cap itself.   
 Fig.1. Area  of GPR lines  
 
1 – lines made by the OKO -3 GPR , AB-150 antenna ; 2 – lines made by the Triton -M GPR , 25 MHz antenna;  
3 – route; 4 – infrastructure facilities  
 
 
--- PAGE 5 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025      
98 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
  
The topography mapping of the subglacial rock base was performed along a system of routes 
located to the east of the oasis, as well as to the south along the tracks connecting the Russian 
Novolazarevskaya Station and the Indian Maitri Station with the Novo  Runway. During this work, 
the lines passed from the rock outcrops of the Schirmacher Oasis and near Aerodromnaya Hill 
for reliable mapping of the subglacial surface. The lines began in areas with a smooth topography 
at the places of rock outcrops in order  to avoid lateral reflections from steeply dipping rock walls. 
For the same reason, the routes did not pass near the vertical walls of the ice cap. Regular gridding 
of the line was hampered by the abundance of rivers and streams that eroded channels in the  
glacier more than 1 m deep, as well as the presence of snow swamps in the lowlands. The eleva-
tion difference on the line along the route to the runway (route TR1) was about 270 m from 
absolute elevations of 144 to 157 m in the southeastern part of the oas is to the 420 m mark  
4.8 km south on the ice cap. In the E -W direction, the elevations changed insignificantly, the 
maximum difference was 14 m . 
Along the runway itself, where the absolute marks of the daylight surface are from 548 to 
570 m, the reflectio n from the rock base was not recorded on the radar images due to the large 
thickness of the ice sheet. During the 67 th RAE season (November – December 2021), the authors 
obtained the first data on the internal structure of the glacier within the runway and  in the vicinity 
of it. Then, the ice flow junction zone and the fold systems adjacent to it from the west and east 
were found. During the present study, in the 69 th RAE season (December 2023 – February 2024), 
the authors selected the specified area for te st assessment of the discussed equipment capabilities 
for studying the internal structure of the glacier to depths of 150 m, including mapping of folded 
structures and other features.  
Equipment, methods of field work and data processing  
The Triton -M GPR wi th an unshielded 25 -50-100 MHz extendable antenna and the improved 
OKO -3 GPR with a 150 MHz shielded antenna with a long record length, adapted for glacier 
studies, were tested for the first time in a thick Antarctic ice sheet conditions. The GPR survey 
started with the field trial. It was aimed at selecting the equipment (radar type and central fre-
quency of antennas) and survey modes (number of accumulations, wheel calibration, sweep time, 
number of points per route, etc.). The goal was to compare the equi pment and select the optimal 
parameters for mapping the subglacial topography and studying the internal structure of the glacier  
at depths exceeding 100 m.  
The surve y was carried out on foot (Fig. 2). When working with Triton -M, the recording wa s 
made in continuous mode (Fig. 2, a). Wh en working with the OKO -3 GPR with a 150 MHz antenna, 
an odometer was used to increase accuracy, which ensured uniform data recording al ong the route 
every 10 cm (Fig. 2, b). GPR routes were positioned by the  EFT M2 GNSS DGPS complex (Fig. 2, c), 
and when t he distance from the geodetic point at Novolazarevskaya Station was more than 3 km, 
by the Garmin GPSMap 64st satellite receiver using GPS and GLONASS navigation satellites. 
Since the survey took place in conditions of rugged terrain and significant elevat ions, planar and 
altitude referencing was made at defined topographic points every 100 m. Such points were marked 
in the radar images using the “marker” tool. Further, during office processing after interpolation, 
each route acquired its own coordinate. Th is method ensures referencing accuracy of the sought 
features to the first tens of centim
--- PAGE 6 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025   
99 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
 
sections to depth sections. In our case, the situation is simplified, since the work area is on blue ice, 
on which the snow cover is either absent or insignificant. Thus, the GPR section is converted to a 
depth section in a model of a homogeneous medium with a permittivity of ε = 3.17, which corre-
sponds to the propagation speed of electromagnetic waves of 16.8 cm/ns. The estimate of ε o f ice 
was based on numerous diffracted wave travel time curves in the glacier and the common depth 
point (CDP) method. The CDP was used with the OKO -2 GPR with AB -150 extendable antennas. 
The generator and receiving antennas were spaced symmetrically relat ive to the centre with a step 
of 0.5 m. The maximum spacing was 20 m. The CDP arrangements were in areas with horizontal 
limits of the subglacial rock base, for which a GPR survey was previously carried out along a system 
of perpendicular lines. The obtain ed values of the permittivity and, accordingly, the propagation 
speed of electromagnetic waves, are in good agreement with similar characteristics of ice considered  
in [43, 44]. The depth of limits within the glacier under study were repeatedly confirmed by  
auger drilli ng when studying lakes covered by ice and englacial tunnels. The error was no more 
than 3 -4 %. 
Triton -M GPR. The shape and structure of the Triton -M GPR antenna (an extendable flexible 
monoski) allow it to be easily moved along the glacier surface, passing  around snowdrifts, zastrugas, 
and other obstacles. Another advantage is the absence of wires, cables, and other connections that 
greatly complicate work in conditions of low temperatures, snow, and strong wind. The autonomous 
recording and control unit is  connected to a laptop via Wi -Fi. During the work, various combinations 
of survey parameters were tested: the sounding pulse frequency, the record length, the number of 
points per route . 
A survey with a 25 MHz antenna, a 1 ,600 ns sweep time, and 1 ,024 poin ts per route was per-
formed on the RW line along the runway axis over a 1 ,300 m segment from the starting point. The 
resulting radar image (Fig. 3, a) shows that the first 100 ns, corresponding to a 9 -metre ice strata, are 
noisy due to the low -frequency signal and contrast reflection, presumably from the operator. Nume -
rous reverberations, also masking the upper part of the GPR section, correspond to mino r crevasses, 
Fig.2. Survey in the Novo Runway area  
--- PAGE 7 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025      
100 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
  
mostly healed. The crevasses are seasonal, appearing on open ice areas in spring (October – Novem-
ber) due to sharp day and night temperature changes. During the Antarctic summer, these minor cre-
vasses fill with water, then freeze and, as a rule, completely heal.  
At long recording times, the glacier layering is clearly observed. Thus, to the 1 ,200 ns mark 
(depth of about 100 m), the patterns  are still visible (Fig. 3, a, inset). The layers observed in the radar 
Fig.3. GPR section along the RW line along the central axis of the runway:  
a – obtained by the Triton -M GPR with a 25 MHz antenna (the inset shows an enlarged section,  
in a square); b – obtained by the OKO -3 GPR, AB -150 antenna,  
the arrow indicates one of the layers in the glacier body  
--- PAGE 8 ---
 
 Journal of Mining Institute . 2025.  Vol. 273. P. 94-107 
© Marina P. Kashkevich, Alina S. Boronina, Evgenii M. Mikhailov, Serge y V. Popov, 2025   
101 
This is an open access article under the CC BY 4.0 license  
 
images reflect ice accumulation and are poorly distinguishable by permittivity. The phenom enon of 
the intense reflections in radar images with weak differentiation of layers by electrophysical proper-
ties can be explained by the low attenuation of the electromagnetic wave in a homogeneous and high -
resistance medium. Ice is exactly such a medium,  where the presence of even minor inhomogeneities 
at the contact of two layers is sufficient to form a high -amplitude reflection. Such inhomogeneities 
can presumably be different densities of interlayers, mineral inclusions, as well as the shape, orienta-
tion, and size of crystals, which is explained by different weather conditions during the snow accu-
mulation and its metamorphism. Thus, providing the minimal difference in permittivity in the glacier 
body layers, the obtained result can be considered quite s atisfactory.  
OKO -3 GPR. The improved OKO -3 GPR with the antenna monoblock AB -150 (see Fig. 2, b) 
was tested in Antarctica for the first time. It allows setting a longer record length, proportionally 
increasing the number of points per route. This makes it much more suitable for studying glaciers and 
compares favourably with the previous generation OKO -2 equipment, where the record length was 
limited by th e number of discrete points per route (512 points), which on a 1 ,600 ns sweep time made 
the radar image almost unreadable, the patterns were poorly traced, the layers were broken into rec-
tangles.  
Figure 3, b shows  a fragment of the section along the RW route (central part), obtained with the 
OKO -3 GPR, AB -150 with a 1 ,600 ns sweep time and 2 ,048 points per route. Due to the weak 
attenuation of  the electromagnetic wave in the continental ice and the absence of contrasting 
interfaces in the upper section, the signal amplitude is enough to form a clear reflected signal even at 
maximum recording times. Due to the high resolution provided by a suffi cient number of samples 
and a powerful transmitter antenna, the layers in the glacier are clearly distinguishable at depths 
exceeding 130 m.  
Comparison of the OKO -3 and Triton -M GPR for studying the internal structure of a glacier. 
During the field trial, sections with a record length of 800 ns obtained on the same RW line section 
using the OKO -3 GPR wi th a 150 MHz antenna unit (Fig. 4, a) and the Triton -M GPR with a frequency 
of 50 MHz were compared (Fig. 4, b). 
Due to the absence of contrasting interfaces in the glacier strata, an insignificant difference in the 
permittivity of the features under study, and often their minor sizes (ice layers differing in the degree 
 
 Fig.4. GPR sections along line RW 