--- PAGE 1 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 1 Geomorphometric modeling and mapping of Antarctic oases  
 
I.V. Florinsky 
 
Institute of Mathematical Problems of Biology, Keldysh Institute of Applied Mathematics, 
Russian  Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow Region, 142290, Russia  
 
Abstract  
Geomorphometr ic modeling is widely used in geosciences. However, geomorphometric 
modeling and mapping of Antarctic oases has not been performed so far.  This article presents the first 
results of our work on geomorphometric modeling and mapping of several Antarctic oase s including 
the Larsemann Hills, Thala Hills, Schirmacher Oasis, and Fildes Peninsula. As input data, we used 
fragments of the Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica. For each territory, we derived digital 
models of the follo wing 17 morphometric variables  from the extracted and edited digital elevation 
models: slope , aspect, horizontal curv ature, vertical curvature, mean curvature, Gaussian curvature, 
minimal curvature, maximal curvature, unsphericity curvature, difference curvature, vertical excess 
curvature, horizontal excess curvature, ring curvature, accumulation curvature, catchment area, 
topographic index, and stream power index . Derived geomorphometric maps can be useful for 
structural geological and process -oriented hydrological studies. The ultimat e goal of the ongoing work 
is to create a digital large -scale geomorphometric atlas of Antarctic oases and other ice -free Antarctic 
territories.  
 
Keywords:  topography, digital elevation model, geomorphometry, surface.  
 
1. Introduction  
Antarctic oases are c ommonly referred to glacier -free areas of the Antarctic coastal zone 
with an area of several tens to several thousands square kilometers, which are characterized 
by: (1)  a local climate largely determined by the surrounding ice sheet; (2) the presence of 
unfrozen water in the form of a system of seasonal streams and unfrozen lakes; and (3) the 
presence of primitive soils and biota (Simonov, 1971; Sokratova, 2010).  
Despite their relatively small size, Antarctic oases are of scientific and practical 
importanc e for Antarctic research. Because of their relative accessibility, these territories are 
convenient for construction of year -round polar stations and seasonal bases, and also attract 
scientists by the possibility of obtaining a significant amount of scient ific field material in a 
short period of austral summer (Sokratova, 2010).  
Geomorphometry is a scientific discipline lying at the intersection of geoinformatics, 
remote sensing, photogrammetry, and computational mathematics, dealing with mathematical 
model ing and analysis of topography, as well as the relationships between topography and 
other components of geosystems (Evans, 1972; Shary, 1995; Shary et al., 2002; Hengl and 
Reuter, 2009; Florinsky, 2016, 2017). Modern geomorphometry has a developed physical  and 
mathematical theory and a powerful toolkit of computational methods. The initial data for 
modeling are digital elevation models (DEMs) ( Guth et al., 2021 ). The objects of modeling 
are usually land surface, submarine topography, glacier surface, subgla cial topography, and 
surfaces of extraterrestrial territories (Florinsky, 2017). These non -smooth objects are usually 
approximated by a topographic surface – a closed oriented infinitely differentiable two -
dimensional manifold in the three -dimensional Eucl idean space (Shary, 1995; Florinsky, 
2016).  
                                                 
 Correspondence to: iflor@mail.ru  
 
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
--- PAGE 2 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 2 Geomorphometric methods are widely used to solve various multi -scale problems of 
geomorphology, hydrology, soil science, geobotany, forestry, geology, oceanology, 
climatology, planetology, and other geosciences. DEM spatial resolution may lie in a wide 
range: from centimeters and decimeters to tens and hundreds of meters and tens of kilometers. 
International experience of research in the field of geomorphometry is summarized in a series 
of analytical reviews and b ooks (Moore et al., 1991; Wilson and Gallant, 2000; Li et al., 
2005; Hengl and Reuter, 2009; Wilson, 2018; Minár et al., 2016; Lv et al., 2017; Florinsky, 
2016, 2017, 2021).  
Prospects of geomorphometric modeling and mapping of Antarctic oases are quite 
obvious both for obtaining new knowledge about quantitative characteristics of the 
topography of these unique natural objects, and for further use of the obtained 
geomorphometric information for solving fundamental and applied problems of 
geomorphology, geolo gy, geophysics, glaciology, climatology, etc. Nevertheless, 
geomorphometric modeling and mapping of Antarctic oases has not been performed so far.  
This article presents the first results of our works on geomorphometric modeling and 
mapping of several Antar ctic oases including the Larsemann Hills, Thala Hills, Schirmacher 
Oasis, and Fildes Peninsula. The ultimate goal of the ongoing work under this multiyear 
program is to create a digital large -scale geomorphometric atlas of Antarctic oases and other 
ice-free Antarctic territories.  
 
2. Study areas  
2.1. Larsemann Hills  
The Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica (Figure 1) is an Antarctic coastal oasis including 
ice-free, low rounded hills with an area of about 40 km2 located on the south -eastern shore of 
the Prydz B ay of the Commonwealth Sea, Ingrid Christensen Coast, Princess Elizabeth Land. 
The oasis consists of two large peninsulas, Stornes and Broknes, three small peninsulas, 
Grovnes, Brattnevet, and Stinear, and about 130 islands including three relatively large , 
Fisher, Manning, and McLeod Islands (Figure 1). The peninsulas and islands are separated by 
a system of fjords and bays, such as, Thala, Nella, and Clemence Fjords , as well as Dålkoy , 
Wilcock , and Quilty Bays. The oasis is bounded by the Dålk outlet glac ier in the east, by the 
glacial plateau in the south, and by the Polararboken  outlet glacier in the west.  
The Larsemann Hills are composed mainly of the Proterozoic garnet -biotite gneisses 
and garnet -sillimanite schists; intrusions of pegmatites and granit es are also present ( Stüwe et 
al., 1989; Carson and Grew, 2007; ATCM, 2021 ). Unique borosilicate and phosphate 
complexes are developed on the Stornes Peninsula (ATCM, 2014).  
The Larsemann Hills were deglaciated between 20,000 and 10,000 years ago ( Burgess 
et al., 1994 ; Hodgson et al., 2001 ; Verleyen et al., 2004 ; Kiernan et al., 2009 ). The oasis 
topography is a structurally controlled, exarated rocky hill terrain ( Bolshiyanov, 2011 ). The 
elongated shape of the large landform elements of the Larsemann Hills is generally related to 
compositional layering and the presence of folds and faults in the metamorphic bedrock 
(ATCM, 2021). Nivation dominates among exogenous topography -forming processes. The 
landscape is rugged with large, structurally controlled fjords  and valleys with steep slopes, 
which are rarely deeper than 100 m on land and have a maximum length of 3 km. Elevations 
range from 30 m to 120 m. The maximum elevation above sea level is 158 m (Blundell Peak 
on the Stornes Peninsula).  
There are about 150 lakes in the oasis. Drainage network is not developed. Snowfields 
are widespread. There is a small passive glacial dome on the Stornes Peninsula.  
The Larsemann Hills is the Antarctic Specially Managed Area No. 6 (ATCM, 2021), 
while its largest portion, the  Stornes Peninsula, is the Antarctic Specially Protected Area 
(ASPA) No. 174, 
--- PAGE 3 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 3 
 
 
Figure 1. The geographic location and elevations of the Larsemann Hills extracted from the REMA 
DEM (Howat et  al., 2019; REMA, 2018 –2022). Peninsulas: BP – Broknes, BtP – Brattnevet, GP – 
Grovnes, SP – Stornes, SrP – Stinear; islands: FI – Fisher, MI – Manning, McI – McLeod; fjords: CF 
– Clemence, NF – Nella, TF – Thala; bays: DB – Dålkoy, WB – Wilcock, QB – Quilty; stations: PS – 
Progress (Russia), ZS – Zhogshan (China), BS – Bharati (India).  
 
There are three year -round operated polar stations in the oasis: Progress (Russia), 
Zhongshan (China), and Bharati (India) (Figure 1). There is the snow -ice airfield Zenith  
(Russia) on the glacial plateau, to the south of the Progress Station.  
 
2.2. Thala Hills  
The Thala Hills (Figure 2) include two ice -separated coastal oases, Molodezhny and 
Vecherny. These are ice -free hills with an area of about 20 km2 located on the shor e of the 
Alasheev Gulf of the Cosmonauts Sea (Enderby Land, East Antarctica). The Thala Hills are 
bounded by the Hays outlet glacier in the east, by the glacial plateau in the south, and by the 
sea in the west.  
The Thala Hills are predominantly composed of  the Proterozoic charnockite series 
(amphibole -pyroxene -plagioclase -quartz feldspar charnockitized enderbites, amphibole -
feldspar -quartz -plagioclase charnockites, and ultrametamorphic feldspar -quartz -plagioclase -
amphibole -biotite gneissic -rapakivite -like c harnockites) and Archean biotite -duroxene 
plagiogneisses ( Grew, 1978 ; Myasnikov, 2011; Myasnikov et al., 2021).  
Topographically, the Thala Hills is exarctic rocky hummocky terrain consisting of 
several ridges stretched parallel to the coast and separated b y snow -covered terraced valleys 
with glaciers, lakes, and channels of temporary watercourses ( Kakareka et al., 2015 ). The 
elevations range from 0 m to 103 m in the Molodezhny oasis, and from 0 m to 272 m (Mount 
--- PAGE 4 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 4 Vechernyaya) in the Vecherny oasis.  
There are  two seasonal bases, Molodezhnaya (Russia) and Gora Vechernyaya (Belarus) 
at a distance of 12 km from each other, in the oases Molodezhny and Vecherny, respectively. 
There are two snow -ice airfields (Russia and Belarus) on the glacial plateau, to the south  of 
the Molodezhnaya and Gora Vechernyaya Bases.  
 
2.3. Schirmacher Oasis  
The Schirmacher Oasis (Figure 3) is located on the Princess Astrid Coast (Queen Maud 
Land, East Antarctica). This is an ice -free area 1.5 –3.5 km wide stretched for about 20 km in 
the sublatitudinal direction. In the north, the Lazarev Ice Shelf with a width of about 80 km 
separates the oasis from the Lazarev Sea. In the south, the ice plateau, separated from the 
inland ice sheet by the Wohlthat Mountains, bound the oasis. In the east a nd west the oasis is 
bounded by the lateral branches of outlet glaciers enveloping those mountains (Bormann and 
Fritzsche, 1995; Dharwadkar et al, 2018; Shrivastava et al., 2019).  
The Schirmacher Oasis is composed of metamorphosed rocks of the Precambrian 
crystalline basement including banded, augen, and garnet -biotite gneisses, alaskite, 
chondalites with migmatites; which in places are intersected by basalt, lamprophyre, 
pegmatite, dolerite, and apatite dikes (Bormann and Fritzsche, 1995; Dharwadkar et al. , 2018; 
Shrivastava et al., 2019).  
The topography of the Schirmacher oasis is an exarctic rocky hummocky terrain 
including roche moutonees and glacial valleys, with elevations ranging from 0 to 228 m and 
average elevations of about 100 m. There are up to 1 80 lakes within the oasis.  
There are two year -round operated polar stations in the oasis: Novolazarevskaya 
(Russia) and Maitri (India) (Figure 3). There is the snow -ice airfield (Russia) on the glacial 
plateau, to the south of the Novolazarevskaya Station.  
There is a glaciological ASPA No. 163 ‘Dakshin Gangotri Glacier’ in the region.  
 
2.4. Fildes Peninsula  
The Fildes Peninsula is the ice -free southwestern tip of the King George Island, part of 
the South Shetland Islands (West Antarctica) (Figure 4). The pe ninsula measures about 15  km 
 5 km, extends from southwest to northeast, and is bounded by the Maxwell Bay of the 
Bransfield Strait in the southeast, by the Fildes Strait in the southwest, by the Drake Passage 
in the northwest, and by the Arctowski Icefie ld in the northeast.  
The Fildes Peninsula is composed of the late Cretaceous volcanogenic rocks (mainly 
basalts, andesites, and tuffs), including interlayers of volcaniclastic deposits between the 
andesite rocks with overlying layers of limestone, tuff con glomerates, sandstone, and clay of 
the early and middle Eocene ( ATCM, 2009a; Schmid et al., 2017).  
The topography of the peninsula is mainly an exarctic rocky hummocky terrain with 
elevations from 0 m to ~160 m and includes a rocky coastline and bays, an e xarctic -
denudation plateau, ancient and modern abrasion surfaces, denudation -accumulative marine 
terraces, rocky lowlands, and valleys ( ATCM, 2009a; Schmid et al., 2017). The northeastern 
part of the peninsula, between the ice -free area and the Arctowsky I cefield, is occupied by the 
Bellingshausen Glacial Dome with elevations ranging from 0 m to 250 m.  
At the Fildes Peninsula, there are small snowfields and small lakes. The territory is 
drained by dozens of minor streams. There are relatively small areas of  marshy ground 
everywhere. The free of ice and snow territory of the peninsula is subantarctic tundra.  
The Fildes Peninsula is one of the most densely populated areas of Antarctica. Four year -
round stations are located there (Figure 4): Bellingshausen (Rus sia), Presidente Eduardo 
Montalva (Chile; territorially coinciding with the village of Villa las Estrellas), Artigas 
(Uruguay), and Chancheng (China). Also, there are the Chilean Rodolfo Marsh airport.  
--- PAGE 5 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 5  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The geographic location and elevation s of the Thala Hills extracted from the REMA DEM (Howat et al., 2019; REMA, 2018 –2022).  
Oases: MO – Molodezhny, VO – Vecherny; AG – Alasheev Gulf; VM – Mount Vechernyaya; MMI – McMahon Islands; HG – Hays Glacier; bays: GB – 
Groznaya, LB – Lazurnaya, OB – Opasnaya, TB – Terpeniya, VB – Voskhod, VcB – Vechernyaya, VzB – Vozrozhdeniya, ZB – Zarya, ZrB – Zerkalnaya; 
capes: BP – Bliznetsov, DP – Dostupny, GP – Gaudisa, GnP – Gnezdovoi, GrP – Granat, KP – Kogot, NFP – Nikolay Feoktistov,  RP – Rog, SP – 
Steregush chy, VP – Vyvodnoy; LG – Lake Glubokoe; seasonal bases : MS – Molodezhnaya, VS – Gora Vechernyaya.  
--- PAGE 6 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 6  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The geographic location and elevations of the Schirmacher Oasis  extracted from the REMA DEM (Howat et al., 2019; REMA, 2018 –2022).  
CIS – continental ice sheet; ISL – the Lazarev ice shelf; polar stations: NS – Novolazarevskaya (Russia), MS – Maitri (India); lakes: OL – Ozhidaniya, ZL – 
Zigzag; mountains: PM – Primetnaya, RM – Rebristaya, RsM – Ryskalina; NP – Nadezhda Peninsula  
 
--- PAGE 7 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 7 
 
 
Figure 4. T he geographic location and elevations of the Fildes Peninsula  extracted from the REMA DEM 
(Howat et al., 2019; REMA, 2018 –2022). DP – Drake Passage, FS – Fildes Strait; MB – Maxwell Bay; 
AI – Ardley Island; BD – Bellingshausen Ice Dome, NV – North Valley, NWP – North -western Platform, 
CM – Central Massif, SM – South Mountains; capes: AP – Aerodromic, EP – Exotic, HTP – Half Three, 
NP – Nebles Point, PP – Priroda, SP – Suffield; LB – Lednikovaya Bay; polar stations: AS – Artigas 
(Uruguay), BS – Bellingshause n (Russia), FS – Frei (Chile), GWS – Chancheng (China)  
 
In the region, there are two ASPAs of paleontological and ornithological profiles: No. 125 
‘Fildes Peninsula’ and No. 150 ‘Ardley Island’ ( ATCM, 2009a, 2009b).  
 
3. Materials and methods  
We used fragme nts of the Reference Elevation Model of Antarctica (REMA) ver. 1.1 DEM 
(Howat et al., 2019; REMA, 2018 –2022 ) as input data for geomorphometric calculations, 
modeling, and mapping. To date, this DEM obtained photogrammetrically from WorldView -1, 
2, and 3 sa tellite images is the most complete and accurate DEM of Antarctica.  
Our preliminary assessment of the accuracy and quality of the REMA DEM showed that 
within the almost all territories under study, they generally meet the requirements of 
geomorphometric mo deling, that is, low level of high -frequency noise, low number of obvious 
artifacts, and sufficient surface smoothness not requiring additional smoothing or filtering).  
However, for the Fildes Peninsula of the King George Island (and generally for all the 
South Shetland Islands ), the accuracy and quality of the REMA DEM are lower comparing with 
the most territory of Antarctica. In particular, this territory is marked by a high number of 
artifacts along island shores. This is connected with peculiarities of photogrammetric processing 
of water surface images. At the same time, such artifacts can be identified and edited (removed). 
--- PAGE 8 ---
arXiv:2305.07523  [physics.geo -ph] 
 8 It is expected that description of the South Shetland Islands  will be improved in next versions of 
the REMA DEM.  
From the REMA DEM,  we extracted the following four fragments:  
 For the Larsemann Hills: a fragment of 18,168 m   14,968 m, which includes the 
Larsemann Hills oasis and adjacent areas of the ice sheet and outlet glaciers. The 
extracted DEM contains 4,253,184 points (the eleva tion matrix of 2,272   1,872).  
 For the Thala Hills: a fragment of 4,688 m   20,920 m, which includes the Molodezhny 
and Vecherny Oases and adjacent areas of the ice sheet and outlet glaciers. The 
extracted DEM contains 1,535,592 points (the elevation matri x of 587   2,616).  
 For the Schirmacher Oasis: a fragment of 6,328 m   20,544 m, which includes the oasis 
and adjacent areas of the ice sheet and ice shelf. The extracted DEM contains 2,034,648 
points (the elevation matrix of 792   2,569).  
 For the Fildes Pe ninsula: a fragment of 9,672 m   11,616 m, which includes the 
peninsula, adjacent islands, and a portion of the Bellingshausen Ice Dome. The 
extracted DEM contains 1,758,130 points (the elevation matrix of 1,210   1,453).  
Since the REMA DEM does not descri be the submarine topography, the extracted DEMs 
includes 2,068,674, 783,812, and 680,592 cells with elevation values for the Larsemann Hills, 
Thala Hills, and Fildes Peninsula, correspondingly.  
For all extracted DEM, the DEM grid spacing is 8 m.  
Before fur ther processing, the extracted DEMs presented in the polar stereographic 
projection were reprojected into the UTM one, zone 43S, 38S, 33S, and 21S for the Larsemann 
Hills, Thala Hills, Schirmacher Oasis, and Fildes Peninsula, correspondingly (Figures 1 –4). 
Reprojected DEMs also have the grid spacing of 8 m.  
At the pre -processing stage, we manually edited the extracted DEMs in order to remove 
obvious artifacts, in particular, false islands, which are actually images of icebergs as well as 
well as a consequen ce of incorrect photogrammetric processing of satellite scenes containing 
images of the sea surface. To edit the DEMs , we used the available topographic maps and 
orthomosaic ( Ministry of Merchant Marine of the USSR, 1972 ; Instituto Geográfico Militar de 
Chile, 1996; Australian Antarctic Division, 2005; Florinsky and Skrypitsyna, 2022).  
From the edited DEMs, we derived digital models of 17 morphometric characteristics, 
namely: 14 local morphometric variables, such as: slope (G), aspect ( A), horizontal curvat ure 
(kh), vertical curvature ( kv), difference curvature ( E), horizontal excess curvature ( khe), vertical 
excess curvature ( kve), accumulation curvature ( Ka), ring curvature ( Kr), minimal curvature ( kmin), 
maximal curvature ( kmax), mean curvature ( H), Gauss ian curvature ( K), unsphericity curvature 
(M); one nonlocal morphometric variable, catchment area  (CA), as well as two combined 
morphometric variables : topographic index ( TI) and stream power index ( SI). The definitions, 
formulas, and brief interpretations  of these morphometric variables are presented in Table 1.  
Then we produced maps of the morphometric variables from the calculated digital models. 
Morphometric maps for the Larsemann Hills, Thala Hills, Schirmacher Oasis, and Fildes 
Peninsula are presented  on Figures 5 –21, 22 –38, 39 –55, and 56 –72, correspondingly.  
For the pre -processing and editing of DEM, geomorphometric calculations, and mapping, 
we used the System for Automated Geoscientific Analyses (SAGA) Version 7.8.2 software 
(Conrad et al., 2015). I t should be noted that the capabilities of SAGA allow the direct 
computation of digital models for only a part of the morphometric variables mentioned above. In 
particular, we directly calculated digital models of six local morphometric variables using the  
Evans method (Evans, 1972): G, A, kh, kv, kmin, and kmax. 
Digital models of the remaining eight local morphometric characteristics 