--- PAGE 1 ---
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
INVITATION FOR INNOVATIVE RESEARCH PROPOSALS  FOR THE  
43rdINDIAN SCIENT IFIC EXPEDITION TO ANTARCTICA (XL III-ISEA)  
(Last date for ONLINE SUBMISSION  – 30 March 2023)  
 
National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research  (NCPOR) , under the Ministry of Earth 
Sciences (MoES), Government of India, is the nodal agency for implementation of the Indian 
Antarc tic Programme. Hitherto, forty one scientific expeditions to Antarctica have been 
successfully completed  and the 42nd Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica (ISEA) is 
currently  underway . The 43rd ISEA (XLIII ISEA ) is scheduled to be launched in October -
November 202 3 and the proceedings are being initiated through this advertisement . 
The 43rd Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica ( 43-ISEA) embarks on a new journey of 
scientific res earch  with focus on “Climate Change  and its signatures in Antarctica ”. NCPOR  
welcomes long -term innovative scientific  proposals in  thematic areas and its sub -themes in 
different disciplines  which are given below . In addition , scientific projects are also invited 
under the new research area “Geological Exploration of Amery Ice Shelf (GeoEAIS) ”, which 
was initiated in 41 -ISEA. The research focus is in Amery Ice -Shelf/Lambert Glacier off Prydz  
Bay which is being developed as a multi -institutional programme with special reference to 
the identification of orogenic and cratonic components to arrive at a refined India -Antarctica 
geological correlation. More details on GeoEAIS is presented in Annexu re I. 
For the 43 -ISEA, we are inviting scientific programs to be executed at Antarctica  for the 
following themes given below:  
I. Climate Processes and Linkages to Change  
a) Antarctic ice -sheet and Sea -level rise  
b) Sea ice  monitoring and modelling  
c) Antarctic Atmosphere / Southern Ocean teleconnections  to the Tropics  
d) Paleoclimate (Ice and sediment ary archives ) 
e) Surface Processes and Landscapes  
II. Crustal evolution  
a) Reconstruction of sub -ice geology  
b) Early earth and the evolution of earth  
c) Heat flow modelling for EAIS behaviour  
d) Geological Exploration of Amery Ice Shelf ( GeoEAIS ) see Annexure  I 
National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research  
Ministry of Earth Sciences, Government of India  
Headland -Sada, Vasco -da-Gama, Goa 403 804  
Phone : (0832) -2520 511; www.ncpor.res.in  

--- PAGE 2 ---
III. Environmental Processes and Conservation  
a) Trends and sensitivity to change  
b)  Human interventions: mitigation and prevention  
IV. Ecosystem  of Terrestrial and Nearshore  
a) Lake biogeochemistry and productivity  
c) Microbial diversity  
d) Polar biodiversity  
e) Wildlife  
V. Observational Research  
a) Atmospheric observations , including climate reference stations  
b) Coastal ocean observatories (Prydz Bay) and deep  ocean mooring  
c) Ionospheric studies / Space weather / Atmospheric electricity  
d) GPS networks / Seismological observation  
e) Hydrographic survey /Bathymetry  
f) Topographical and geological mapping  
f) Satellite Communication and Remote sensing  
g) Stellar observations  
h) Human  Physiology   
--- PAGE 3 ---
Lazarev Sea  
Schirmacher Oasis  
(Maitri)  
Prydz Bay  
Larsemann Hills  
(Bharati)  
 1693 NM  
(3098 km)  1. Area of operation  
NCPOR  operates two-year round  stations in Antarctica, which are  ~3000 km apart.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.1. MAITRI Station  (70045’58”S; 11043’56”E)  is located in Schirmacher Oasis , Central 
Dronning Maud Land.  It is an inland station nearly 80  km from the edge of the Lazarev  
ice-shelf (Indian Barrier for Ship) .  
Connectivity: Maitri is connected by intercontinental flight between Cape Town and 
Novo  airfield (near Maitri station: approx. flying time is 6 hrs). Maitri can be reached as 
early as late October or early November  by intercontinental flight . Flight timings and 
dates can be advanced/postponed subject to weather conditions in Antarctica.  
The Voyage Vessel reaches Maitri (India Bay/Lazarev Sea) tentatively during the first 
week of March.  
 
1.2. BHARATI  Station  (69°24.41'S, 76° 11.72' E ) is located  in North Grovnes Island, in 
Larsemann Hills  along the Ingrid Christensen Coast  and off Prydz Bay . It is located off 
the Quilty Bay (~ 200 m from the coast).  
Connectivity:  Bharati is connected by intra -continental flights viz., Basler/Twin Otter 
aircraft ( 12 seater). Flights  operate between Novo airfield  and Progress  airfield  (near 
Bharati Station) . First flight to Bharati can be  expected around mid -November . The 
flying time between Novo and Progress  takes approximately 8 -10 hrs , with a mid -way 
stop for fueling . The seating may vary depending on passengers and cargo. These 
flights are very expensive and need  prior planning for the availability of aircraft and 
midway refuelling.  Currently, t here are no direct chartered flights betw een Cape Town 
and Bharati. Bharati by air is connected only via Maitri.  
The Indian Voyage Vessel reaches off Bharati in the first/second week of January.  
Note: Access to Lambert Glacier/Amery Ice Shelf  region will be from Bharati Station, 
Larsemann Hills  or off Amery Ice Shelf  via Voyage Vessel , depending on weather 
conditions , helicopter availability  and project objectives . 
 Lambert Glacier / 
Amery Ice shelf  
--- PAGE 4 ---
1.3. SHIPBOARD  OPERATIONS  can be proposed during the course of the voyage .The 
general Voyage route is Cape Town -Bharati -Maitri -Cape Town. The route may  change  
based on the expedition objective.  
Leg I: Cape Town to Bharati – Direct connection is only through NCPOR’s chartered 
ships generally  take 10 to 12 days , depending on the weather and sea -ice conditions.  
 
Leg II: Bharati to Maitri –The voyage time takes 5 to 7 days , depending on the weather 
and sea -ice conditions.  
 
Leg III - Maitri to Cape Town:  By ship , it takes 8 -12 days , depending on the weather 
and sea -ice conditions.  
 
Scientific operations which can be done without stopping the  ship can be carried out en 
route  voyage. The ship is a chartered cargo vessel (not a research vessel) and 
separate lab space is not available.  
 
The infrastructure support needed in Antarctica / during the voyage should be spelt 
out in detail in the Project Proposal format and should be defended before the group 
of experts at the time of presentation of project proposal/s.  
 
 
[Considering the distance between two stations - Maitri & Bharati; and logistics involved, 
scientific proposals are expected to be well thought out and checked for feasibility 
before submitting ] 
 
2.0  TRAVEL  
2.1 Travel Season for Antarctica  
2.1.1  Air operations between Cape Town and Maitri  (inter -continental) , and between Maitri 
and Bharati  (intra -continental)  are possible only in the summer season , i.e. between 
November and February . The flight schedule is highly dependent  on weather 
conditions and charted in discussion with other National Antarctic Programmes 
operating in the Central Dronn ing Maud Land (cDML) under the aegis of COMNAP.  
 
2.1.2  Ship operation  between Cape Town and Bharati/ Maitri , depending on the voyage 
plan for the season , is possible from December  to April of the succeeding calendar 
year. The Voyage Vessel exits from Lazarev Sea  (India Bay ) in the last week of 
March.  
 
[The last flight usually is scheduled during mid -February. The ship exits Lazarev Sea 
(India Bay) usually during late March. Antarctica becomes inaccessible once the ship 
exits from India Bay as winter sets in .] 
 
2.2 Mode of Travel  
2.2.1  By air : Goa to Cape Town  and back  (Commercial airlines : Managed by NCPOR ); 
Cape Town - Maitri -Bharati ( through chartered flights under the aegis of  DROMLAN 
initiative ) 
 
2.2.2  By sea:  Cape Town -Bharati -Maitri -Cape Town (by ship/s on NCPOR  charter  vessel . 
 
[It’s important to note that the mode of travel i s not by choice but based on the time of 
travel, destination and nature of the project . Travel arrangements for all expedition 
members from Goa to Antarctica and back are managed by NCPOR ] 
 
 
 
  
--- PAGE 5 ---
 
3.0 Stay in Antarctica  
 
NCPOR  operates two year -round stations , Maitri and Bharati , for scientists to carry out 
research activities. Entry and exit to Antarctica , due to its peculiar geographic position , 
is restricted between November and  March of the succeedi ng calendar year.  
 
Scientists participating in the 4 3-ISEA , desirous of working only through the summer 
season , can embark on Antarctica in October -November  2023 and return by February -
April 2024, and those proposing for the winter season will continue their stay in 
Antarctica only to return between December’  2024 to March’ 202 5 
 
 
4.0 Infrastructure facility  
4.1 Maitri  
 
4.1.1  Living Capacity : Winter – 25  
Around 25 Expedition members for long -term can be  accommodated in the main 
building of Maitri station.  
 
4.1.2  Living Capacity : Summer   – 40 to 60  
Expedition members for short -term can be  accommodated in the summer facility 
comprising of containerised living modules.  Each container can accommodate four 
expedition members.  
 
4.1.3  Laboratory space . 
There is limited containerised/ modular laboratory space available. Members have to 
carry their items of equipment/chemicals / sample collection, storage & transportation 
devices. In case of large space requirements for any instrumentation both in terms of 
logistics and power consumption, the same should be spelt out in detail and also 
presented /discussed during the presentation  at NCPOR . 
 
4.1.4  Inland transport  
 
4.1.4.1  Helicopters  
Ship based helicopters are available for scientists working in the field. The helicopters 
are available only when the ship is around Maitri (at the Indian Barrier) . Need -based  
heli support shall be provided , subject to weather and operational situations . Projects 
with intensive helicopter requirements should present and discuss the details during 
the workshop .   
4.1.4.2  Snow Vehicles  
Snow vehicles ( Pisten B ully, Snow scooters ) are available round the year. However , 
requirement details should be present ed and discuss ed during the workshop .   
 
[In view of the available infrastructure, the proposed scientific work should be 
confined within the logistic reach, ideally not exceeding 100 km from the station in 
campaign mode]  
 
4.2 Bharati  
 
4.2.1  Living Capacity  – 47 - Summer & Winter  
All expedition members will be accommodated in the main building of Bharati Station  
 
4.2.2  Laboratory – 270 s q feet of laboratory space is established with regulated power 
supply. Laboratories are augmented with some basic equipment such as Laminar Air 
Flow, Milli -Q Ultra purification water system, Ultra -Sonicator, Autoclave, Hot Air Oven, 
--- PAGE 6 ---
Muffle Furnace, electronic weighing balance, thin section preparation device, rock 
cutting equipment etc.  
 
4.2.3  Inland transport  
 
4.2.3.1  Helicopter /s  
The helicopters are available only when the ship is near Bharati. Ship-based  
helicopter /s are available for scientists working in field , subject to weather and 
operational conditions . Projects with intensive helicopter requirements should present 
and discu ss the details during the workshop .   
 
4.2.3.2  Snow Vehicles  
 
Snow vehicles (Pisten Bully &  snow scooters) are available round the year. However, 
requirement details should present and discuss the details during the workshop .   
 
[In view of the available infrastructure, the proposed scientific work should be 
confined within the logistic reach, ideally not exceeding 100 km from station in 
campaign mode]  
 
4.3 Communication facility available with the stations  
Internet connectivity and e -mail facilities are available at both stations. While Bharati is 
supported by high-speed  internet, Maitri currently operates on satellite support for 
internet and calling facilities.  
NCPOR provides limited time for calling from the station and the ship. The 
communication is through satellite phones.  
 Shorter duration (Summer period): 6 min/month  
 Longer duration (Winter period): 20 min/month  
 A common e -mail Id is provided on the voyage vessel and at both stations for 
communication.  
 
5.0 Eligibility for participation in the 43rd ISEA Expedition  
For participating in the 43 -ISEA, the proposer of the scientific project i.e. the Principal 
Investigator (PI) - should be a regular employee, with an interest/expertise in the relevant 
field.  
The participant /s indicated in the scientific proposal for participation in the 43 -ISEA 
should mostly be affiliated with the Principal Investigator’s organization/institute/ 
university. In case of collaboration with other institute/ university /organization, sa me 
should be explicitly mentioned and supplemented with relevant documents. NCPOR 
encourages scientific collaboration with other organizations/institutes/universities.  
 
The proposals for the 43 -ISEA should be submitted to NCPOR through proper channel 
and d uly endorsed by the head of the institution. In case of participation of two or more 
institutes, scientific proposal should have the consent from all the participating 
organizations/institute/universities.  
 
 The proposal has to be submitted through the onli ne submission portal only which,  
can be accessed here. The last date for submission of online proposal is 30 -March -
2023.  
 
Proposals are invited for both short -term (summer) and long -term (winter) for Bharati 
(Larsemann  Hills), Amery Ice Shelf/Lambert Glacier, Maitri (Schirmacher Oasis) and 
Voyage Route.  
--- PAGE 7 ---
Preference will be given to long -term programmes resulting in meaningful scientific 
research with tangible results.  Programmes with capabilities for online data acquisit ion 
and transmission are  encouraged.  
 
 
6.0 Process of selection  
After due submission, the proposal will be reviewed by Subject Experts for preliminary 
screening. The PI should respond/ attend to review comments received by them. Upon 
recommendation by the subject expert and satisfactorily attending to their 
query/comments, the PI will be invited to defend their research proposal at a workshop 
headed by a panel of experts. The workshop is  tentatively scheduled for 19 -20 May, 2023 
[dates may be subjected to change] at NCPOR . All proposals should be scientifically and 
logistically viable.  
 
PI/Co -PI should invariably defend  the proposal at NCPOR during the workshop in 
person and at their own expense. Request for online defense is  not accepte d. 
 
 
6.1 All organiz ations to provide full personal detai ls of participating individual by 31 -May-2023 
on the prescribed form numbered AL -1208 (https://isea.ncpor.res.in/ ). Please send your 
nominations and completed AL -1208 forms to antarctic -sci@ncpor.res.in  or 
antarcticscience22@gmail.com .  
 
The nominated team members/participants for the expedition will have to undergo - 
 
6.2 A detailed Medical Examination at the All Indi a Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) New 
Delhi . Participants should arrange for their own t ravel and stay  at their own 
expense . This is immediately followed by Snow acclimatization training at the 
Mountaineering & Skiing Institute (ITBP), Auli, Uttarakhand. The expenses from MoES, 
New Delhi , to Auli and  back to MoES, New Delhi , will be managed by NCPOR. Medically 
and physically fit members will receive an intimation about their status in due time . 
6.3 Members  from Government institutes are encouraged to apply for the  Official  Passport 
with last date for submission to NC POR on1-September -2023. 
Note:  For short term participation , the passport should be valid until  30-September -2024 
and for long term participation , the validity should be 30-September 202 5. 
7.0 Team movement for Antarctica  
Team Movement 43-ISEA (202 3-24) 
Air Travel to Maitri/ Bharati tentative schedule for season 202 3-24 
 
Departure from Goa  Oct-23 to Dec -23 
Departure from Cape Town  Nov-23 to Dec -23 
Arrival Maitri/Bharati  Nov-23 to Dec -23 
Departure Maitri/Bharati  Dec-23 to Feb -24 
Arrival Cape Town  Dec-23 to Mar -24 
Arrival Mumbai/Delhi  Dec-23 to Mar -24 
 
Expedition members shall be inducted and de -inducted from Antarctica in batches 
depending on availability of ship/flights and project requirements.  
8.0 Scientific Cargo Movement:  
The expedition scientific cargo is sent from Goa to Cape Town through commercial 
freight carriers/shipping lines as well as by air cargo. It takes nearly 45 -60 days for the 
--- PAGE 8 ---
cargo to reach Cape Town excluding the lead time for customs formalities. For onwar d 
carriage to Larsemann Hills, Antarctica, the cargo will be shipped onboard the chartered 
expedition vessel.  
 
Please note below points for smooth transfer of cargo to Antarctica:  
 
a) Air Cargo: From Goa – Cape Town – Maitri . PIs can directly send their scientific 
cargo to Cape Town at the earliest through their institutes. This will enable them to 
save time and deliver their cargo at the earliest at our logistic hub viz., Cape Town, 
South Africa. From here, cargo will be delivered to the respective stati ons based on 
the time of induction  of the PI into Antarctica.  
b) Members going directly to Maitri may also carry their select scientific equipment/s by 
air (with prior intimation to the Logistic division at NCPOR). The total weight in this 
case will be limit ed. 
c) There is a limitation for transfer of cargo by air via intra -continental flights between 
Maitri and Bharati. The maximum weight these small flights can carry is between 
1500 – 1800 kgs (weather dependent) which is inclusive of personnel, personnel 
cargo, scientific cargo, and emergency kits. Heavy cargo cannot be carried in these 
flights and best avoided.  
d) Following Point (c) If a PI intends to reach Bharati or Maitri early November, then they 
need to plan their scientific objectives and expedition accor dingly. Heavy cargo can 
be delivered only by ship/voyage vessel. In case, the project has tons of cargo, PIs 
can plan to deliver the cargo to the respective station during the preceding expedition 
and work in the following expedition.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
e) PI’s/Organizations should make sure that the scientific cargo must reach NCPOR, 
Goa on or before 15 -August -2023 (for air cargo) and 15 -September -2023 (for voyage) 
else it could be left out and thus jeopardizing their programme.  
f) Package dimensions for cargo transfer by air:  The size and weight of individual 
packaging/box/baggage should not exceed 90x72x45 cm (LHW) and 30 kg i n weight.  
g) Packaging shall be proper and airworthy , preferably in steel/ aluminium  boxes and the 
dimensions of the individual units preferably not more than 30 kg in weight unless it’s 
for some special scientific instrument. Scientific instruments in carton boxes are 
discouraged however , consumables/lab ware/glassware etc. , may be sent in factory 
packing. The packing should be tamper proof and safe against manipulation, 
Insulation must be provided for temperature variation (if required) resistant to weather 
factors; heat,  rain, moisture, Wooden packing must be avoided for air transfer as it 
requires fumigation  and renders the cargo heavier . Individuals have to carry suitable 
boxes(insulated/metal) for proper storage of samples required to be shipped from 
Antar ctica to India.  
Also, may clearly mention the following details on each boxes;  
 Expedition: Kindly mention the expedition number, e.g. 43 ISEA  
 Owner’s Name: Name of the organization / Name of expedition member  
 Final destination: MAITRI or BHARATI or VOYAGE (Choose appropriate 
destination)  
 Box No: e.g. 1 of 5; 2 of 5; 3 of 5; 4 of 5; 5 of 5  
 
  Unsafe and unworthy packaging will be out rightly rejected.  
 